Proofreading - Set Up Error Handling -and- Error Event (#5017)
mendix/docs: content/en/docs/howto/logic-business-rules/set-up-error-handling.md

To ensure that every user or process can only see persisted data, all the data changed in a transaction is only available within that specific transaction. None of the changes made inside that microflow will be available outside the microflow, not even to the user that initiated the microflow. The information will only be available to the whole application once the microflow has successfully completed all the actions.

### 2.3 Transactions Prevent Two Processes from Using the Same Object at the Same Time

When an object is updated, the Mendix Runtime will place a lock on that object for the duration of the transaction. This means that while the transaction is running, no other transactions within the same session are allowed to read or write that object. As soon as the transaction is finished, the lock will be released automatically and any waiting processes will continue normally.

Please note that this is not the same as preventing two users from editing the same object. It is still possible for two users to open the same object and change it 1 millisecond after each other. The latest change will still be applied.

## 3 Error Handling Options {#error-handling-options}

> When an error occurs in a microflow, all changes that have been made to objects are rolled back and the microflow is aborted. Optionally, you can handle errors in the microflow itself by configuring different error handling settings. You can even inspect the details of the error by looking at the predefined objects `$latestError` and `$latestSoapFault`. The following table presents different options for custom error handling. 

Reviewer: @Yiyun333 - I'll add a note here about using an End Event to end your optional error handling flow.
```suggestion
When an error occurs in a microflow, all changes that have been made to objects are rolled back and the microflow is aborted. Optionally, you can handle errors in the microflow itself by configuring different error handling settings. You can even inspect the details of the error by looking at the predefined objects `$latestError` and `$latestSoapFault`. The following table presents different options for custom error handling.

{{% alert color="info" %}}
If you specify a custom error handling flow, you should end it with an [end event](/refguide/end-event/). If you end the microflow with an [error event](/refguide/error-event/) then the error will be handled in the place the microflow was called from.
{{% /alert %}}
```

Please note that this is not the same as preventing two users from editing the same object. It is still possible for two users to open the same object and change it 1 millisecond after each other. The latest change will still be applied.

## 3 Error Handling Options {#error-handling-options}

When an error occurs in a microflow, all changes that have been made to objects are rolled back and the microflow is aborted. Optionally, you can handle errors in the microflow itself by configuring different error handling settings. You can even inspect the details of the error by looking at the predefined objects `$latestError` and `$latestSoapFault`. The following table presents different options for custom error handling.

{{% alert color="info" %}}
If you specify a custom error handling flow, you should end it with an [end event](/refguide/end-event/). If you end the microflow with an [error event](/refguide/error-event/), the error will then be handled in the place the microflow was called from.
{{% /alert %}}

| Type | Image | Description |
| --- | --- | --- |

> | **Error handling – Custom with rollback** | {{< figure src="/attachments/refguide/modeling/application-logic/microflows-and-nanoflows/microflows/error-handling-in-microflows/custom-with-rollback-option.png" width="700px">}} | Everything that happened up to the error will be rolled back in the database, and a new transaction will be initiated. It will neither change nor roll back the state of the objects that are still in memory. As a result of that, recommitting the same objects will not cause a change as the runtime no longer knows which members are changed or whether the object was created or not. If you want to change the data in the database again, you should copy the changes into another/new version of the same object.|

Reviewer 2: "the Runtime" > "Mendix Runtime" throughout

| **Error handling – Custom without rollback** | {{< figure src="/attachments/refguide/modeling/application-logic/microflows-and-nanoflows/microflows/error-handling-in-microflows/custom-without-rollback-option.png" >}} | Any action taken inside the microflow can be reverted, but everything that happened before the error will be kept. The microflow will continue over the custom error handler flow. The transaction in the database will not be rolled back, meaning that all successfully committed changes in objects within activities of the microflow preceding the current failing activity will stay in the database.|

> | **Continue** | {{< figure src="/attachments/refguide/modeling/application-logic/microflows-and-nanoflows/microflows/error-handling-in-microflows/continue-option.png" >}} | Any action taken inside the microflow can be reverted, but everything that happened before the error will be kept. The microflow will continue as if nothing happened. Avoid using this option – you should only use this in the more complicated combinations of multiple error handlers. You want to make sure that you at least log the error message. If it breaks, you need to know about it.|

Reviewer 2: Should the warning for "Avoid using this option" be at the end of the description? It's not clear how the warning relates to the following 2 sentences "You want..." and "If it breaks..." Are those qualifying "you should only use this in the more complicated combinations of multiple error handlers" ? And what does "it" refer to in, "If it breaks, you need to know about it." ?

Author: The content that begins with "Avoid..." was relocated underneath the table and was applied with note styling. I also rephrased the content a bit to make it clearer to the users.

An error handler can be set on a microflow activity, decision, or loop.

### 3.1 Error Handling on an Activity or a Decision

On an activity or decision, you have three options:

* **Rollback** (default)
* **Custom with rollback**
* **Custom without rollback**

> For the latter two options, you can draw an additional flow from the microflow elements (activities or decisions) and mark this flow as the error handler flow. When selecting **Custom with rollback**, it will trigger this path when the error occurs and still rollback your objects afterwards. The **Custom without rollback** option does not rollback the objects. After you selected a flow as the error handler, it will show this as in the following image:

Reviewer 2: "latter two" is rather unnecessary and a bit rhetorical for only 3 options - I would write out the option names in full.

Reviewer 2: "rollback" as a (phrasal) verb should be "roll back" - needs to be changed throughout

Author: I found three instances in total in the doc where "roll back" should be used (as a phrasal verb). All the other instances of "rollback" should be kept as it is, since it is used as a noun (the activity of rolling back).

The **Custom without rollback** option is only invoked when the action itself causes an error event, meaning you will still have access to any database objects you created or modified before the action which caused the error handler event. If you want to keep changes to objects of a persistable entity, you still need to commit them explicitly after a **Custom without rollback** error if they were not committed before the error occurred.

### 3.2 Error Handling on a Loop

On a loop, you get two options:

* **Rollback** (default)
* **Continue**

The **Continue** option means that when an error occurs, the loop will simply continue to the next iteration. It will show as a continue icon on the exit flow of the loop.

{{< figure src="/attachments/refguide/modeling/application-logic/microflows-and-nanoflows/events/error-event/error-event-loop.png" >}}

## 4 Error Handling Transactions

There are many different combinations of error handling and transactions that you can configure. The sections below present some possible combinations and help you understand how different configurations behave.

### 4.1 Default Error Handling

> With default error handling, there is always a transaction running. But since there is no custom error handling specified, the Mendix Runtime will create one transaction for all the actions executed in the microflow. All sub-microflows will be executed in the same transaction. 

Reviewer 2: "the Mendix Runtime" > "Mendix Runtime" with no need for "the" - change throughout

Reviewer 2: Nevermind - I checked the PNG and it recommends "the" as a best practice, so we can keep it as that.

Author: Okay.

{{< figure src="/attachments/refguide/modeling/application-logic/microflows-and-nanoflows/microflows/error-handling-in-microflows/default-error-handling-diagram.png" width="550px">}}

The changed **Order** and **Customer** information:
| Order | | | Customer | |
| -- | -- | -- | -- | -- |
| ID | 1234 | | ID | 1234 |
| Date | 1/1/2018 | | Status | Gold |

### 4.2 Error Handling – Custom with Rollback

Any sub-microflow initiated with error handling set to **Custom with rollback** will NOT initiate a new transaction. The original transaction will be re-used in the sub-microflow. If an error occurs, the transaction will be completely reverted and a new transaction will be initiated so the custom error flow can continue using that new transaction. See the following example:

{{< figure src="/attachments/refguide/modeling/application-logic/microflows-and-nanoflows/microflows/error-handling-in-microflows/custom-with-rollback-microflow.png" width="400px">}}

{{< figure src="/attachments/refguide/modeling/application-logic/microflows-and-nanoflows/microflows/error-handling-in-microflows/custom-with-rollback-diagram.png" width="550px">}}

> At status 1 in the above example:

Reviewer 2: I would add a line break between sentence and table.

Reviewer 2: (Throughout)

Author: Done.

| Order | | | Customer | |
| -- | -- | -- | -- | -- |
| ... | ... | | ID | 1234 |
| ... | ... | | Status | Silver |

At status 2 in the above example:
| Order | | | Customer | |
| -- | -- | -- | -- | -- |
| ID | 1234 | | ID | 1234 |
| Date | 1/1/2018 | | Status | Gold |

At status 3 in the above example:
| Order | | | Customer | |
| -- | -- | -- | -- | -- |
| ... | ... | | ID | 1234 |
| ... | ... | | Status | Silver |

Because you are switching transactions, merging back to the original process is not recommended, as this will result in inconsistent data. If you use error handling with rollback in a sub-microflow, you should make sure that all parent microflows are configured to use error handling continuously. It is preferable that you re-throw the exception after running your custom actions.

### 4.3 Error Handling – Custom without Rollback

> A sub-microflow with error handling set to **Custom without rollback** will always create a sub-transaction. All actions within the parent microflow will be persisted, and what happens inside the sub-microflow is determined by how the error is handled. If a flow was created to handle the error, this would only have affect on the sub-microflow. Note that if custom error handling is specified in the sub-microflow, only the changes in the sub-microflow are reverted in case of an error (changes in the parent microflow are not reverted). See the following example:

Reviewer 2: Worth putting "Note that if custom error" into info-alert with styling to break up the text?

Reviewer 2: However, it's not clear what "See the following example" refers to - the whole descriptive paragraph, or what the note describes as a kind of contingency. This should be clarified for the user.

Author: I just rephrased the "Note that..." sentence. It's not necessary to have a seperate note information here. "See the following example" should describe the whole descriptive paragraph.

Author: I just rephrased the "Note that..." sentence. It's not necessary to have a seperate note information here. "See the following example" should describe the whole descriptive paragraph.

{{< figure src="/attachments/refguide/modeling/application-logic/microflows-and-nanoflows/microflows/error-handling-in-microflows/custom-without-rollback-diagram.png" width="550px">}}

At status 1 in the above example:
| Order | | | Customer | |
| -- | -- | -- | -- | -- |
| ... | ... | | ID | 1234 |
| ... | ... | | Status | Silver |

At status 2 in the above example:
| Order | | | Customer | |
| -- | -- | -- | -- | -- |
| ID | 1234 | | ID | 1234 |
| Date | 1/1/2018 | | Status | Gold |

At status 3 in the above example:
| Order | | | Customer | |
| -- | -- | -- | -- | -- |
| ID | 1234 | | ID | 1234 |
| Date | 1/1/2018 | | Status | Silver |

## 5 Combinations of Different Types of Error Handling

Most of the time, you will be using a single activity with custom error handling. However, if you are developing more complicated processes where you are sending data outside of the application, it is important to realize what happens when an error occurs later in the process. For example, you do not want to send out notifications about a status change if an error occurs and therefore reverts the change.

> Especially when interacting with other systems, you need to think about how you want to process the errors. The best solution depends on what you want to do: continue, skip/revert the record you are working on, or keep the changes you have made so far but stop the process. All of these options can be done as long as you know what you want to achieve. The instructions below will show you a couple of examples of how you can combine different error handling options. 

Reviewer 2: "All of these options" > "Any of these options" since the user will choose 1, not 3 options.

Author: Thanks for detecting this. Very nice find.

| Color | Description |
| --- | --- |
| {{< figure src="/attachments/refguide/modeling/application-logic/microflows-and-nanoflows/microflows/error-handling-in-microflows/orange.png" >}} | Initial transaction – this transaction is initiated when the microflow starts. Custom error handling with rollback does not initiate any transactions. Therefore, the microflow is executed, but all the actions in both the parent and the sub-microflow will be reverted. None of the changes made anywhere in this transaction will be applied. |
| {{< figure src="/attachments/refguide/modeling/application-logic/microflows-and-nanoflows/microflows/error-handling-in-microflows/blue.png" >}} | Transaction initiated by **Custom with rollback** activity – after catching the exception, a new transaction is initiated to execute the remaining microflow activities. |

{{< figure src="/attachments/refguide/modeling/application-logic/microflows-and-nanoflows/microflows/error-handling-in-microflows/rollback-and-rollback.png" width="550px">}}

### 5.2 Rollback in the Parent Microflow, Continuing in the Sub-Microflow

| Color | Description |
| --- | --- |

> | {{< figure src="/attachments/refguide/modeling/application-logic/microflows-and-nanoflows/microflows/error-handling-in-microflows/orange.png" >}} | Initial transaction – this transaction is initiated when the microflow starts. This transaction will be completely reverted because the sub-microflow re-throws the exception. None of the changes made during this transaction will be persisted. (If the sub-microflow was not re-throwing the exception, all changes except **SendEmail** would have been persisted in the database.) |

Reviewer 2: "If the sub-microflow was not re-throwing the exception, all changes except **SendEmail** would have been persisted in the database" > the conditional language here is too heavy. Use simple tenses.

Author: Changed to "If the sub-microflow does not re-throw the exception, all changes except **SendEmail** will be persisted in the database"

Reviewer 2: "will be" > "are" - choose present tenses instead of future, usually.

| {{< figure src="/attachments/refguide/modeling/application-logic/microflows-and-nanoflows/microflows/error-handling-in-microflows/green.png" >}} | Transaction initiated by sub-microflow – at the start of the sub-microflow, a new transaction is initiated. Any changes made in this transaction will be reverted because the activities in the **SendEmail** sub-microflow use default error handling.

{{< figure src="/attachments/refguide/modeling/application-logic/microflows-and-nanoflows/microflows/error-handling-in-microflows/continue-and-continue.png" width="550px">}}

## 6 Inspecting Errors

> When an error occurs inside a microflow, under the hood, a Java exception is raised that contains information about the error that occurred. Inside a custom error handler (as in, after an error handling flow), you can inspect the type of this Java exception as well as several other properties. Every microflow contains two predefined error objects, `$latestError` and `$latestSoapFault`. `$latestError` is an object of entity **System.Error**, while `$latestSoapFault` is an object of entity **System.SoapFault**, which is a specialization of **System.Error**.

Reviewer 2: "under the hood" = colloquial/jargon - is that necessary? Used elsewhere in docs?

Author: I did find that it is used in several documents, for instance, [Test Native App](https://docs.mendix.com/refguide/mobile/distributing-mobile-apps/testing-mobile-apps/) and release note [9.3](https://docs.mendix.com/releasenotes/studio-pro/9.3/) . I guess it is a jargon?

Reviewer 2: RN have a bit more room for jargon and a different voice. As it's used here, I think it may be unnecessary.

Author: Okay. I will delete it from this doc then.

In a custom error handler that is executed after an error occurs, `$latestError` is set to an object containing information about the error that occurred. If the error is a SOAP fault (an error that occurs as a result of a web service call), `$latestSoapFault` is set to an object that contains more specific information about the SOAP fault. Otherwise, `$latestSoapFault` is `empty`.

{{% alert color="info" %}}
You can determine whether an error was a SOAP fault by checking `$latestSoapFault` for `empty`.
{{% /alert %}}

The following table shows the attributes of **System.Error** and **System.SoapFault**.

| Entity | Attribute | Type | Description |
| --- | --- | --- | --- |
| System.Error | ErrorType | String | The Java exception type of the error that occurred. |
| System.Error | Message | String | The message of the Java exception. |
| System.Error | Stacktrace | String | The stacktrace of the Java exception. |

> | System.SoapFault | Code | String | The Code element of the SOAP fault. |

Reviewer 2: "Code" should not be capitalized in the description, nor should "Reason" or "Node" or "Role" or "Detail" - those are not proper nouns, they are generic.

Author: Changed all.

| System.SoapFault | Reason | String | The Reason element of the SOAP fault. |
| System.SoapFault | Node | String | The Node element of the SOAP fault. |
| System.SoapFault | Role | String | The Role element of the SOAP fault. |
| System.SoapFault | Detail | String | The Detail element of the SOAP fault. |

Click [here](http://www.w3.org/TR/soap12-part1/#soapfault) for more information on SOAP faults.

{{% alert color="warning" %}}
In microflows that apply entity access, it is not possible to inspect the attributes of error objects for security reasons. You can pass the error object to a sub-microflow that does not apply entity access and inspect the attributes there.
{{% /alert %}}

## 7 Best Practices

Consider the following best practices for error handling:

* Always use a log activity to print the error message and stack trace.
* Never use the **Continue** option, since that does not give you the option to print any infomation (the Mendix Runtime will just ignore the error).
* Always add custom error handling on integration or email activities.

> * Don’t overdo it – you can specify a lot of complicated error handling combinations, but this makes it more difficult (and slower) for the Mendix Runtime to evaluate the microflow, and it also makes it more difficult to predict the exact behavior in case of an exception.

Reviewer 2: We don't use contractions in docs like "Don't" (even if it's just describing a best practice) - this presents an inconsistency

Author: Fixed.

category: "Logic & Business Rules"
weight: 80
tags: ["error", "error handling", "rollback", "microflow", "logic"]
#To update screenshots of these microflows in the Studios, use the Microflow Screenshots app.
---

## 1 Introduction

> When working with microflows, it is important to realize that there are always transactions. These transactions help in achieving the correct result. In case something goes wrong, they also help us to keep all the information in our application consistent. 

Reviewer: This was already in the doc, but I tend to pick up the [difference between "if" and "in case"](https://englishlessonsbrighton.co.uk/difference-if-in-case/) as it leaps out at me. Probably in 10 years time English will have evolved and there will no longer be a distinction - but for now 😀
```suggestion
When working with microflows, it is important to realize that there are always transactions. These transactions help in achieving the correct result. If something goes wrong, they also help us to keep all the information in our application consistent. 
```

Reviewer 2: Yes, "if" is a better, more minimal, and clear choice; "in case" is often overused for contingencies.

Author: After another discussion with Mark, we adopted the following option: "They also keep all the information in our application consistent **in case** something goes wrong."

This document tells you how errors can be handled in microflows, how error handling transactions work, and how different error handling options can be combined. It also provides information on how you can inspect errors using predefined error objects. 

## 2 Transactions

### 2.1 Transactions Keep Your Data Consistent

> Everything that happens in the platform happens in a transaction. What is more, unless otherwise specified, everything is executed, or nothing is executed. Accordingly, if you don't specify any error handling and the microflow you are trying to execute gives you an error, nothing will be executed. This means that all the objects you created or changed will be reverted, you will not get the text feedback, and the platform will not show the new page. Either every single step in the microflow is successfully executed, or nothing is executed. That is the only way to keep processes and data consistent. 

Reviewer: I feel the original had too many commas!
```suggestion
Everything that happens in the platform happens in a transaction. What is more, unless otherwise specified, everything is executed or nothing is executed. Accordingly, if you don't specify any error handling and the microflow you are trying to execute gives you an error, nothing will be executed. This means that all the objects you created or changed will be reverted, you will not get the text feedback, and the platform will not show the new page. Either every single step in the microflow is successfully executed or nothing is executed. That is the only way to keep processes and data consistent. 
```

### 2.2 Transactions Keep the Changes Isolated

While updating or creating your objects, you do not want users to see temporary information or empty records because a microflow has not finished executing yet. 

To ensure that every user or process can only see persisted data, all the data changed in a transaction is only available within that specific transaction. None of the changes made inside that microflow will be available outside the microflow, not even to the user that initiated the microflow. The information will only be available to the whole application once the microflow has successfully completed all the actions.

> ### 2.3 Transactions Prevent Two processes from Using the Same Object at the Same Time

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### 2.3 Transactions Prevent Two Processes from Using the Same Object at the Same Time
```

> When an object is updated, the platform will place a lock on that object for the duration of the transaction. This means that while the transaction is running, no other transactions are allowed to read or write in that same object. As soon as the transaction is finished, the lock will be released automatically and any waiting processes will continue normally.

Reviewer: I think this could be clearer. I'm not sure that "platform" is the write term here. The lock only applies to data within the particular session - not data that is written by other users (as clarified in the next paragraph).
Perhaps you could check with the runtime-totw in Slack whether something like this is better?
```suggestion
When an object is updated, the runtime will place a lock on that object for the duration of the transaction. This means that while the transaction is running, no other transactions within the same session are allowed to read or write that object. As soon as the transaction is finished, the lock will be released automatically and any waiting processes will continue normally.
```

Reviewer 2: Good find, I also agree that "platform" is not clear, and that is generally a term that should not be used for something so specific and technical.

I would replace "the runtime" with "Mendix Runtime"

Author: I am waiting for someone from the slack channel runtime-totw to double comfirm this. No one responded yet.

Author: Leroy van Engelen has replied in the [thread](https://mendix.slack.com/archives/C3T260XGA/p1663767496779389?thread_ts=1663665573.722029&cid=C3T260XGA). I am planning to replace "the runtime" with "the Mendix Runtime" for all occurances in the doc. Please let me know if you have any suggestion.

Reviewer: Sounds good.

Please note that this is not the same as preventing two users from editing the same object. It is still possible for two users to open the same object and change it 1 millisecond after each other. The latest change will still be applied.

> ## 3 Error Handling Options

Reviewer: We are missing one important bit of information here, and I don't think it is covered anywhere else either.
When you define an error flow, the error flow should terminate in an **End Event**, not in an **Error Event**. If you end your error flow in an error event, that passes all the error handling up to the calling event and everything can get rolled back anyway, depending on how the calling event handles the error.

> When an error occurs in a microflow, all changes that have been made to objects are rolled back and the microflow is aborted. Optionally, you can handle errors in the microflow itself by configuring different error handling settings. You can even inspect the details of the error by looking at the predefined objects `$latestError` and `$latestSoapFault`. The following table presents different options of error handling. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When an error occurs in a microflow, all changes that have been made to objects are rolled back and the microflow is aborted. Optionally, you can handle errors in the microflow itself by configuring different error handling settings. You can even inspect the details of the error by looking at the predefined objects `$latestError` and `$latestSoapFault`. The following table presents different options for error handling. 
```

| Type | Image | Description |
| --- | --- | --- |

> | **Error Handling – Custom With Rollback** | {{< figure src="/attachments/refguide/modeling/application-logic/microflows-and-nanoflows/microflows/error-handling-in-microflows/18580964.png" width="700px">}} | Everything that happened up to the error will be rolled back in the database, and a new transaction will be initiated. It will neither change nor roll back the state of the objects that are still in memory. As a result of that, recommitting the same objects will not cause a change as the runtime no longer knows which members are changed or whether the object was created or not. If you want to change the data in the database again, you should copy the changes into another/new version of the same object.|

Reviewer: > It will neither change nor roll back the state of the objects that are still in memory.

I'm not sure what this means. It seems to contradict what follows. I _think_ what happens is that it completely loses track of objects which are in memory and needs to retrieve them from the database, but perhaps the data-modeling channel can help.

Perhaps we should pick this up later, it isn't really part of proofreading.

| **Continue** | {{< figure src="/attachments/refguide/modeling/application-logic/microflows-and-nanoflows/microflows/error-handling-in-microflows/18580952.png" >}} | Any action taken inside the microflow can be reverted, but everything that happened before the error will be kept. The microflow will continue as if nothing happened. Avoid using this option – you should only use this in the more complicated combinations of multiple error handlers. You want to make sure that you at least log the error message. If it breaks, you need to know about it.|

An error handler can be set on a microflow activity, decision, or loop.

> On an activity or decision, you have three options:

Reviewer: I wonder if it would be clearer to use sub headings?
### 3.1 Error Handling on an Activity or Decision
### 3.2 Error Handling on a Loop

Author: Good idea. I think adding sub headings will indeed make the content clearer. I will add them, thanks!

> * **Rollback** (default)

Reviewer: This isn't one of the three options we mention above. Do you think we need to add it into the table?

It is basically what happens if there is an error and no specific option is selected. In other words, there is no error handling, but I think that electing not to handle an error is still a valid option for error handling.

Author: I also think it's a good idea to add this to the table above. I am just a bit concerned about what image we should show to the users, given that there is no error handling/no icon for this default option. So we just show a normal microflow here then?

* **Custom with rollback**
* **Custom without rollback**

> For the latter two options, you can draw an additional flow from the block and mark this flow as the error handler flow. When selecting **Custom with rollback**, it will trigger this path when the error occurs and still rollback your objects afterwards. The **Custom without rollback** option does not rollback the objects. After you selected a flow as the error handler, it will show this as in the following image:

Reviewer: I don't like "block".
@MariaShaposhnikova - should we say "activity" here, or is there some other way to describe the shape which is on the screen?

Author: Maria's suggestion: microflow elements (activities, decisioins, etc.). So we can be more specific about what an element represents under a certain context.

Author: Maria's suggestion: microflow elements (activities, decisioins, etc.). So we can be more specific about what an element represents under a certain context.

### 4.1 Default Error Handling

With default error handling, there is always a transaction running. But since there is no custom error handling specified, the platform will create one transaction for all the actions executed in the microflow. All subflows will be executed in the same transaction. 

Take the following microflow as an example. The changed order and customer information (see the table below) is only available inside the transaction until the microflow transaction has completed.

{{< figure src="/attachments/refguide/modeling/application-logic/microflows-and-nanoflows/microflows/error-handling-in-microflows/18580961.png" width="200px">}}

{{< figure src="/attachments/refguide/modeling/application-logic/microflows-and-nanoflows/microflows/error-handling-in-microflows/18580951.png" width="550px">}}

The changed **Order** and **Customer** information:
| Entity | Attribute | Value |
| -- | -- | -- |
| **Order** | ID | 1234 |
|           | Date | 1/1/2018 |
|**Customer**| ID | 1234 |
|            | Status | Gold |

### 4.2 Error Handling – Custom with Rollback

> Any sub-microflow initiated with error handling set to **Custom with rollback** will NOT initiate a new transaction. The original transaction will be re-used in the subflow. If an error occurs, the transaction will be completely reverted and a new transaction will be initiated so the custom error flow can continue using that new transaction. See the follwoing exampe:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Any sub-microflow initiated with error handling set to **Custom with rollback** will NOT initiate a new transaction. The original transaction will be re-used in the subflow. If an error occurs, the transaction will be completely reverted and a new transaction will be initiated so the custom error flow can continue using that new transaction. See the following example:
```

{{< figure src="/attachments/refguide/modeling/application-logic/microflows-and-nanoflows/microflows/error-handling-in-microflows/18580956.png" width="400px">}}

{{< figure src="/attachments/refguide/modeling/application-logic/microflows-and-nanoflows/microflows/error-handling-in-microflows/18580950.png" width="550px">}}

At status 1 in the above example:
| Entity | Attribute | Value |
| -- | -- | -- |
| **Order** | ... | ... |
|           | ... | ... |
|**Customer**| ID | 1234 |
|            | Status | Silver |

At status 2 in the above example:
| Entity | Attribute | Value |
| -- | -- | -- |
| **Order** | ID | 1234 |
|           | Date | 1/1/2018 |
|**Customer**| ID | 1234 |
|            | Status | Gold |

At status 3 in the above example:
| Entity | Attribute | Value |
| -- | -- | -- |
| **Order** | ... | ... |
|           | ... | ... |
|**Customer**| ID | 1234 |

> |            | Status | Silver |

Reviewer: I'm still not happy with these. I think they take up too much space.
They will do for now, so probably better to make a note to look at later as they need a lot of work, but:
1. Redo the flows to be horizontal, rather than vertical
2. Make the state diagram smaller - don't use huge fonts in the boxes
3. Try to summarize the values in the tables in a shorter way.
4. Are all the steps necessary - not sure what taking the sum of TotalPrice actually adds to this example, and the "Retrieve 'Orders' from database step doesn't seem to be included in the state diagram anyway.

Author: Totally agree. We will probably need to contact someone from Design?

Because you are switching transactions, merging back to the original process is not recommended, as this will result in inconsistent data. If you use error handling with rollback in a subflow, you should make sure that all parent microflows are configured to use error handling continuously. It is preferable that you re-throw the exception after running your custom actions.

### 4.3 Error Handling – Custom without Rollback

> A sub-microflow with error handling set to **Custom without rollback** will always create a sub-transaction. All actions within the parent microflow will be persisted, and what happens inside the sub-microflow is determined by the sub-microflow. If no custom error handling is specified in the sub-microflow, only the changes in the sub-microflow can be reverted in case of an error. See the following example:

Reviewer: Not sure I understand "If no custom error handling is specified in the sub-microflow, only the changes in the sub-microflow **can be** reverted in case of an error." I think what it means is "If no custom error handling is specified in the sub-microflow, only the changes in the sub-microflow _**are**_ reverted in case of an error." You could, of course, revert the changes in the main microflow by not choosing this option for your error handling!

|**Customer**| ID | 1234 |
|            | Status | Gold |

At status 3 in the above example:
| Entity | Attribute | Value |
| -- | -- | -- |
| **Order** | ID | 1234 |
|           | Date | 1/1/2018 |
|**Customer**| ID | 1234 |
|            | Status | Silver |

## 5 Combinations of Different Types of Error Handling

Most of the time, you will be using a single activity with custom error handling. However, if you are developing more complicated processes where you are sending data outside of the application, it is important to realize what happens when an error occurs later in the process. For example, you do not want to send out notifications about a status change if an error occurs and therefore reverts the change.

Especially when interacting with other systems, you need to think about how you want to process the errors. The best solution depends on what you want to do: continue, skip/revert the record you are working on, or keep the changes you have made so far but stop the process. All of these options can be done as long as you know what you want to achieve. The instructions below will show you a couple of examples of how you can combine different error handling options. 

> ### 5.1 Rollback in the Parent Flow, Rollback in the Subflow

Reviewer: I think we are missing a picture somewhere in this section of what the actual microflow and submicroflow do. We only have state diagrams which I find difficult to relate to any specific microflow/sub-microflow combination.

Reviewer 2: @Yiyun333 comment to resolve, this should probably be in your new Jira issue?

Author: Yes, this is already listed in the new Jira issue.
